New Thinking Allowed is presented by the
California Institute for Human Science,
a fully accredited university offering distant
learning graduate degrees that focus on mind,
body and spirit. The topics that we cover here, we
are particularly excited to announce new degrees
emphasizing parapsychology and the
paranormal. Visit their website at cihs.edu.
Thinking Allowed. Conversations on the
leading edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey Mishlove.
Hello and welcome. I'm Emmy Vadnais,
co-host with Jeffrey Mishlove. Our topic today is
Psychedelics and the Cosmic Mind with my guest,
Chris Bache, who is Professor Emeritus
in the Department of Philosophy and Religious
Studies at Youngstown State University in Ohio,
where he taught for 33 years. He is also adjunct
faculty at the California Institute of Integral
Studies, Emeritus Fellow at the Institute of
Noetic Sciences and on the Advisory Council of
Grof Legacy Training. Chris is author
of four books, Life Cycles,
Reincarnation and the Web of Life,
Dark Night Early Dawn, The Living Classroom,
Teaching and Collective Consciousness and
LSD in the Mind of the Universe, Diamonds
from Heaven. If you enjoy this program,
please like, subscribe, press the bell icon
and share. Chris is joining us from just north
of Asheville in Weaverville, North Carolina.
Now I'll switch over to the internet video.
Welcome, Chris. It's a great joy to have
you with me on New Thinking Allowed today.
Thank you, Amy. It's a pleasure to be here. Today,
we're going to discuss your deep exploration
of yourself, your own spiritual journey and into
the cosmic mind. When you had 73 LSD sessions
between the years of 1979 to 1999, and you
outlined that in your book, LSD in the Mind of the
Universe. Before we get into all that you
experienced and what you gleaned and learned
from those sessions, can we just begin with
talking a little bit about what you've noticed
in the last, oh, I don't know, 10 plus years
or more where it seems that the taboo related
to psychedelics seems to be shifting. The
types of psychedelics there are out there
and what their uses are for, not each one,
but sort of overall why people do this.
And today we're going to focus on
specifically the cosmic exploration of them.
Well, as you know, there
is a worldwide renaissance
of research taking place in psychedelics.
At the forefront of that research is the focus
on therapeutic healing. That's what's bringing
psychedelics back into the intellectual and
clinical community. The capacity of these
amplifying substances to bring forward the
personal unconscious and to unearth the wounds
of the personal unconscious and to assist and
deepen and accelerate people's healings of trauma
and various issues, post-traumatic stress,
depression, things like this.
A second use of psychedelics, overlapping
but different from therapeutic healing,
is using psychedelics to promote spiritual
awakening, an awakening to the true nature,
our deeper nature underneath our personality
nature, to deepen our
understanding, our experience
of the wisdom of the universe, the intelligence of
the universe, the consciousness of the universe,
classic kind of spiritual awakening
to the nature of spiritual reality.
And that's why I got started in this work,
really, was to deepen my spiritual awakening.
But the protocol that I ended up using was so
strong and so evocative. Within a few years,
I was having experiences that went far beyond
anything that could be understood in terms of
either therapeutic healing or spiritual
awakening. And I came to understand over
time that the project
that I was involved in
was cosmological exploration. That
is, a systematic attempt to explore
the deep structure of spiritual
reality or the deep structure
of the consciousness of the universe
itself. So that's really what my work is about.
I'm not a clinician. I am trained as a philosopher
of religion. What interested me from Stan Grof's
early work was the capacity of these substances
to lay bare not only the personal issues, but to
enter into deep communion with the consciousness
that lies behind existence. Can you share,
give us an overview of the
different types of psychedelics?
Just to kind of list them off, of course, because
there are many, but we're going to primarily talk
about your experience with LSD today. Many
psychedelics. I mean, I guess the primary ones
that come to mind are LSD, psilocybin, MDMA,
though that's probably an empathogen more than
psychedelic, 5-MeO-DMT, salvia divinorum, San
Pedro. I mean, I think these are the types of
psychedelics that most people are familiar
with. There are all sorts of derivatives. MDMA,
they're derivatives off of each of
these little tweaks along the way.
And we also want to say upfront that you're
not recommending necessarily that people
engage in the same process you engaged in
or advocating necessarily for the use of
these per se. Is that right? Absolutely.
There are a large percentage of the population
who shouldn't be doing psychedelics at all. These
are very powerful amplifiers of consciousness.
They have tremendous evocative potential. And
there are persons who should not be venturing
into these waters. And no one should be
venturing into these waters without really good,
high quality, professional guides accompanying
you to keep you safe as you enter into this
territory. Now, the protocol that I chose to work
with was high doses of LSD. I worked at 500 to
600 micrograms. And looking back at it, at
the end of it, I think, what was I thinking?
That was ridiculous. But I had a deep hunger to
explore the nature of existence. And working at
these high doses took me on an adventure of
a lifetime. But this is very demanding work,
which requires a lot of
concentration, a lot of safeguards,
and a lot of time to assimilate the experiences
And I really, knowing what I know now, at the
end of this journey, I strongly recommend against
using the protocol that I used. If I were doing it
over again, I would work with lower doses of
psychedelics. I'd be much gentler on myself.
I'd be willing to sort of peel
back the layers of the psyche
much more gradually than I did in this work. So
to begin into your journey, what was the impetus
for you to embark on this deep exploration with
high doses of LSD? Well, I had just finished my
graduate work. I had just started my academic
career. At the time, I was a pretty convinced,
atheistically inclined agnostic. And then I
met the work of two people. Ian Stevenson,
whose work on reincarnation convinced me
that reincarnation was a simple fact of life.
And the other one was Stanislav Grof. And I read
his book Realms of the Human Unconscious. I read
it in 1978, two years after it had just come out.
And as soon as I read that book, I recognized that
Stan's work had tremendous significance, not
only for psychotherapy, but it had tremendous
significance for philosophy
of religion, philosophy of
consciousness. And I knew that if I was ever
going to make a contribution in this field,
I had to undergo my own therapeutic exploration,
my own regimen. So very uncomfortably, I made a
decision to break the law in a very, I hope,
disciplined and restrained way. And I began a
series of psychedelic sessions, which ended up,
much to my surprise, ended up lasting 20 years.
I worked for four years, I stopped for six years,
and then I worked for another 10 years, finishing
in 1999. And then I spent 20 years after that,
digesting these experiences, analyzing them,
sifting them, sorting them, and then wrote
LSD in the Mind of the Universe in 2019,
20 years after I had stopped my sessions.
Can you give us a sense of what your
sessions were like? How you began?
You mentioned that you had a sitter,
somebody with you in that process. How did
you choose to set up your set and setting?
Well, basically, I followed the protocol
established by Stan, reflected in his book
Realms of the Human Unconscious, and then
clarified further in his book LSD Psychotherapy,
where he lays out all the nuts and bolts of
working in this modality. I was always in a room
separated from the world, protected from the
world, no interruptions, by myself with my sitter,
who was my wife at the time, who's a clinical
psychologist who studied the psychedelic
literature with me. I'm lying down, I'm using
eye shades and headphones, conventional kind of
classic psychedelic deep introspection, deep
meditative orientation, very carefully curated
music to support the opening and the peaking and
the closing of a session. So the basic idea is
to profoundly energize the unconscious and then
to create an environment where the energies rising
through your unconscious can be engaged cleanly
and clearly. If you stay in contact with the
physical world, if you're in dialogue with friends
or if you're going to a concert, that's all fine
and good, but that's just not what this work
is about. It requires a powerful amplification
of the unconscious, but then creating a very
carefully controlled environment that allows
you to engage what rises conscientiously and most
importantly to follow whatever arises to its very
bottom level, to the bottom line, to let it take
you wherever it wants to take you. If I recall
correctly, it was typically on Saturdays because
you had a very important day job teaching at a
university and I think your sessions lasted about,
was it eight hours each
roughly? Yeah, pretty much.
I would start in the early morning and I would
finish by nighttime that night, a late afternoon
nighttime, so a session would last eight, ten
hours or so of the carryover tail, but basically
a good hard eight hours each session. So it's a
major commitment. Eventually I developed spiritual
protocols that I would adopt in the weeks leading
up to a session and in the weeks after a session
and particularly the day or two before a
session and the day or two after the session.
You really have to work with that time and
with the energy that is stirred in you because
if you're working with very high doses of a
powerful psychedelic like LSD, it taps into
very deep levels of the universe and it takes
your body and mind and subtle energy system
a time to process that material and so it's a
major time commitment. It's just not the day of.
It's several days before and several days after.
You also took meticulous notes from your sessions
as well, which is a lot of what's in your book.
Yeah, that's the first step of integration is to
create an accurate phenomenological description
of exactly what happens in your sessions because
integration is the foundation of your future
sessions. If you don't integrate your sessions
thoroughly and conscientiously, then you're
not going to have as likely to have as deep an
experience the next session out. So there's a
circle where you open, but then you integrate
what you experience, which lays the foundation
for the deeper opening in your next session.
Yeah, it seems like they built upon each other.
In my experience, they did. Again, I kind of
standardized my sessions as much as possible,
eliminating as many variables. I always was
using the same substance, the same dose,
the same set and setting, the same sitter,
even in the same part of the country.
If you change those variables, it changes the
subtlety of the interface between your mind
and the universe's mind that you're engaging.
So by trying to standardize those variables,
you create an environment of sustained
communion or dialogue with this deeper
consciousness. And by creating that sustained
clear contact point, my experience was that
the universe or the consciousness, whatever
it was that I was engaging, that consciousness
took me deeper and deeper in a systematic fashion.
It was like taking a series of graduate courses
in consciousness. It was a tremendous, rigorous,
systematic expansion of my frame of reality.
Why did you choose this path versus, for example,
sitting in meditation or some other spiritual
path that can lead you deeper into these realms?
Well, I had been meditating since college. I was
familiar with meditation. I'd meditated in a
couple of different traditions by that time.
And I'm a professor of religious studies, so
I had a good solid grounding in the world's
spiritual traditions. I taught courses in
psychology of religion and transpersonal studies
and comparative mysticism. So I understood the
world of meditation and contemplative practice.
I started by thinking that these sessions would
basically help me break through some of the
obstacles that had risen in my contemplative
practice. What I found, however, was that
this was a protocol of
spiritual exploration
took me deeper than I had ever imagined
being possible when I began this
work. And once I was into it a couple of years,
I had developed an aptitude for working in these
states. And I never stopped meditating. I was
always meditating through this time. I was always
doing yoga and various spiritual practices. In
fact, I think that the deeper you want to go
in working with psychedelics, the more important
it is to have a daily spiritual practice that
helps anchor you and helps you absorb the
experiences that you unleash with psychedelics.
It was a different protocol. It gave me access
to states of consciousness that you can reach
with meditation, but only with lifetimes,
not just one lifetime, but many lifetimes
of meditation. So I differentiate between
what I call the path of temporary immersion,
which is working with psychedelics, as you're
only immersed in these states for hours at a time,
versus the path of presence, of contemplative
presence, where it's a slower path,
but it tends to produce states of abiding
transparency, whereas the temporary path
pushes you deep into these conscious domains,
and then it wears off and you come back.
They're complementing approaches,
but they are different.
Let's begin with your very first session. Just
to get us started, because I know you've done
many of them, to give the listeners, the audience,
the viewers a taste of what your experience was
like that led you to keep
wanting to come back for more.
Probably the most significant thing
that happened in my first session
was that I entered a phase of the work where I
could not remember who I was. I could not remember
what I was, what I did for a living. I could
not remember whether I was a man or a woman,
even. It was a complete interruption of my stream
of consciousness that was telling me who and what
I was. This was a frightening experience, a
jarring experience, but in the end, I learned
that it was a very helpful experience because it
showed me that it would be pointless for me to try
to stay in control, because if you can't control
your self-knowledge, then that's about as basic
as you can get. This session taught me that
in this work, you have to surrender radically
to whatever arises. It saved me a lot of time
and energy later when more demanding experiences
opened. There's a tendency to sort of want to
maintain control, to hold on to reality as you
know it. In this type of work, you have to let go
of reality as you know it. You have to completely
surrender and go where it wants to take you. That
was just the first lesson that basically said,
don't waste time trying to maintain control.
Before we go further into some of your sessions
and giving us a taste of your experiences and
what you learned, have you come to understand
the physiology of what LSD is doing on the
human physiology, the nervous system? Of course,
a lot of people think about connect consciousness
with the brain, which of course, it's more than
that. However, I recently spoke with Jill Bolte
Taylor, who is a neuroanatomist from Harvard.
She wrote a well-known book, Her Stroke of
Insight, where she had a stroke. She had an
eight-year journey of recovery back, but she
described that our personal sense of identity
is just the size of a peanut in our brains. I
follow the discussion of the scientists about
what is biochemistry of LSD and how it affects
brain structure and default mode network
interruption and those type of discussions,
but I'm not really drawn to that conversation.
I'm not primarily a scientist in training. I
basically have taken more of a psychological
approach to understanding that
these substances, whatever
their mechanism, they amplify consciousness.
They hypersensitize consciousness and they allow
you to experience dimensions of your mind and
of reality beyond your mind, which usually
were kept in a space-time kind of focus
where we don't experience these subtler textures.
Right. Where we can feel trapped inside our bodies
or in what most people consider is primarily the
materialistic world, which we know is
there's much more than that,
which is what we're talking about today.
Yeah. Yeah. That's the real draw to me.
I basically work within the frame of reference
that I had acquired from Stan Grof and some of the
other earlier researchers using a description
of the dynamic qualities of psychedelic
consciousness or the consciousness that arises
with psychedelics. I'll let the science guys
sort out the physiology of it.
I know that that's interesting
and I find that often the physiological
discussion is carried out within reductive
metaphysical assumptions, which really is
not helping our conversation right now.
You mean the conversation in general.
We're having a good conversation, right?
I mean, particularly the attempts to sort of
understand, to correlate what's happening in
the brain physiologically with the states
of consciousness that one is experiencing,
but often these discussions take place within
a certain set of metaphysical assumptions,
and too often those metaphysical assumptions
tend to be reductive. They tend to sort of lean
in the direction of thinking that physical
reality is the dominant and determining reality
of one's experience. But when you actually look
at the experiences that emerge in psychedelics,
that restrictive metaphysical
framework is shattered.
Yeah. Well, I just want to touch
on it for now and primarily because
there may be those listening thinking, well,
this is just your brain on drugs and it's causing
the whole chemical reaction. That's been discussed
with near-death experiencers and so forth, but
research has shown that there's more going
on with that. So I definitely understand
what you're saying and we can get into the
veracity or the trusting of these experiences
a little later in our conversation. Can you
take us more into some of your experiences
with your sessions with LSD to give us
a taste of what that was like for you?
That's a hard question. I mean, let's give a
context. Some very influential books were written
based on a very limited number of psychedelic
experiences. So Aldous Huxley wrote his very
important, beautiful book, The Doors of
Perception, after only one mescaline experience.
Houston Smith wrote his book, his
Collected Reflections on Psychedelics,
Cleansing the Doors of Perception, after only
taking LSD six times over the course of his
lifetime. Michael Pollan wrote his book, which
is a very important, very helpful book, but after
only a handful of psychedelic experiences. So the
challenge that anyone faces coming into my work
are the challenges that I have conveying my
experiences is just how long the journey was,
how many layers of consciousness opened in that
journey. It's not simply a matter of opening 73
times to the same interface, is that there is a
cycle of death and rebirth that reproduces itself
so that death breaks you free of one level of
reality, physical reality, in the beginning.
It enters, takes you into a non-physical,
spiritual reality, and you work there for a while,
but if you work consistently, eventually
you'll go through another death and rebirth
that will take you into another level of
reality where you have to learn the whole
rules of that level of reality, which then
will be followed taking you into another level.
So the problem I have with answering your
question is so many levels of reality.
If I focused on any one,
I'd be leaving out so many others. So
let me just say this in the beginning.
When I was looking over the whole of my sessions
and putting them together in order to write this
storyline of what happened on those sessions,
I eventually differentiated or distinguished
five different broad categories that my sessions
fell into. First, having to do with personal mind,
your personal unconscious, your personal story.
Second, collective mind, which has to do with the
collective psyche, the psyche of humanity,
the species mind. The third, archetypal mind,
which in my case, I'm primarily addressing
not archetypes in the Jungian sense, but
archetypes more in the Platonic sense of the
levels, dimensions of reality, which lie outside
time and space and outside the collective
psyche. Causal levels of reality are
the level of oneness, the level where
oneness becomes the dominant reality.
And then beyond that, diamond luminosity, a
particularly clear dimension of light that
I encountered and worked with in the last five
years of my work. So all of my experiences,
I can kind of lay them out as a sequential
journey, starting at the level of personal mind,
moving into the level of collective mind,
archetypal mind, so on and so forth.
Well, I would love to discuss each of those
levels you went into. What I recall reading
in your book that seemed to be common themes of
your sessions were that it was, like you said
earlier, a letting go and that there was, it
seemed a lot of pain and suffering to actually
reach to these deeper levels of consciousness.
Can you share what that was like for you?
In the early stage, and when I was working at
the level of personal mind, that the pain and
suffering came in the form of what Stan Grof
has very well discussed and presented in his
discussion of the perinatal level
of consciousness. Basically,
sometimes reliving your birth,
but confronting the fundamental existential
questions that dominate life and physical reality.
Is there any meaning in the universe? Is there any
order, any design to it, any intelligence of it?
Because at just the physical level, everything
we love, everything we know will be destroyed at
death. Is there any reality beyond death? I mean,
that's, and therefore you, you have to face the
deepest levels of metaphysical angst in order to
move through this until eventually your identity
is just crushed and shattered. That's easier
for some people to undergo
than it is for other people,
but you have to surrender your time-space identity
in order to gain access to the next level of
reality. At that next level of reality, I
continue to have a deepening confrontation
with pain, suffering, and violence. It
was so deep and it lasted so long and it
seemed to encompass so many hundreds of thousands
of persons in so many thousands of years
that I eventually came to the
decision that this was not some,
didn't represent a deepening or
cleansing or healing of my personal
psyche. That what was being healed
here was some aspect of the collective
psyche of humanity itself, that something was
using my sessions in order to set in motion
a reconciliation and a healing of levels of pain
that were fundamentally collective, not personal.
And then more levels of death and rebirth
where the nature of death and suffering
changes the deeper you go. But the
basic principle is pretty simple.
If you want to experience oneness with God or if
you want to experience a deep experience of the
nature of the mind of the universe, the problem
is our historical consciousness is just too small.
If you want to literally experience it, I mean
it's one thing to think about it, but to actually
immerse yourself in the communion with these
levels of reality, your small identity has to be
surrendered and you have to flow, be willing
to flow into a larger level of identity.
So eventually you're going into levels of reality
where it would be a misrepresentation to think
that Chris Bache went and had those experiences.
Rather, Chris Bache has to be destroyed,
dissolved in order for these levels of
consciousness to manifest inside Chris Bache's
awareness. But the fact that I remember those
experiences doesn't mean that my personality
identity was present when those experiences were
being had. It's kind of like you have to lose
yourself, enter into communion with the universe,
and then when you come back you gather your
and then my personality synthesizes them,
digests them, trying to integrate them.
But it's a pulsing. You learn to sort of
surrender completely, open, breathe deeply,
you receive teachings, then
you bring it all back in,
and then you try to integrate it and consolidate
it. What are some of the teachings you received?
That the universe is a manifestation of a single
consciousness, a massive consciousness,
beyond anything that we've ever begun to grasp
in our Western religious and philosophical
traditions, that creation is an
intentional act. It is an act …
I hate to use the word design because those
theories are problematic, but there is an
intelligence manifesting itself in time and
space that we are part of this intelligence,
that our nature is of the same nature as its
nature. So this is an ancient idea. Atman is
Brahman. The essence of the individual is the
essence of the totality. That reincarnation
is simply a fact of life. I don't think we get
anywhere in trying to understand existence unless
we understand the pulse of life, unless we
understand that our current life is just
the most recent in many, many repeating cycles of
life and death. That there is an underlying logic
to the circumstances within which we find
ourselves. The Buddhists and the Hindus talk about
karma, that there is a deeper
intentionality working itself
out in the circumstances of
our existence, and that… our
evolutionary existence, is not simply driven
by blind chance and mechanical processes,
which are purely mechanical, but that there
is a deeper intelligence manifesting itself
in the circumstances of our life, in
the challenges that we are facing,
and inviting us to become more by the end
of our life than we were in the beginning.
So just a few touch points. Yeah, yeah. Going
back to your experiences in these sessions,
it seems that death and rebirth and a
purification process happened in many,
if not all, of your sessions. Yeah. What did
you come to understand was the reason for that?
First, the general structure of the
sessions as I experienced them is that
every session, there's a sort of a rhythm
of a cycle with variations, but basically,
the first early hours of a session are spent
in some type of deep purification process,
deep confrontation. And then if you surrender to
that process and let it take you, it reaches a
culmination point. There is a surrender, a death
rebirth process in which you are then spun into
transpersonal ecstatic places for the remainder
of the session. And then that runs its course.
And then the next session, however many months
between, and I was doing about five sessions a
year on average, starts you right back into
the purification part and carrying you then
forward into the ecstatic portion. So the purpose
of the purification and the purpose of the death
is simply cleaning, just cleaning,
cleaning, cleaning, cleaning.
When you eventually come to have deep experience
of the fundamental identity of your nature
and the divine nature, or the infinite nature,
that you are the infinite, then it gives you a
different perspective on what it is that was
present preventing you all those years from
realizing that. what was keeping you from it. And
it's this tight conditioning of the psyche. It's
the type conditioning which is associated with
your time-space consciousness. And that has to
be softened, it has to be released,
it has to be let go in order to
move into these expansive places.
So the death rebirth cycle is actually a
purification cycle. In fact, I learned that
death is actually an intense stage of
purification. Once you've died many times,
you learn that truly it's impossible to die. What
you are can die. The structure of your life can
die. Reality as you have known it can die. But the
phoenix always rises. The essence of the person
always emerges in a different reality
with new potentials, with new capacities,
but it's impossible to die. And the reason
we can't die is, I think, because our nature
is the nature of the divine. So the form can die,
but the essence cannot die. Once you know that,
then I began to understand that the experience
of death, which kept coming up in my sessions,
was actually an experience, an
advanced experience of purification.
When purification reaches a critical portion,
position, so that it begins to dissolve the
fundamental structures of what you had known
as real, then you have reached the death point,
the death and rebirth point. And death has come
back to grace you again. So from my perspective,
experiencing death in a psychedelic session
or to experience horrendous suffering or pain
is actually an exciting stage in the work. It's
not something to be avoided. A lot of people worry
about, oh, I don't want to have a bad session. We
got to do everything we can to avoid having a bad
session. But I think that's a
radical misunderstanding of the
depth of consciousness and the power that
technique gives you. In my experience,
you begin to understand that
the deeper the purification,
the deeper the ecstatic immersion, so that you
begin to welcome the purification. You begin to
welcome the challenges that you face. You begin
to welcome the bad sessions in order to actualize
a higher, more intimate experience with the
divine consciousness. Now, that's assuming
that you're working in a completely controlled
environment. You have done all the homework.
You've done your preparation. You can have a bad
session for a lot of bad reasons. You can be in
the wrong place, the wrong time, not preparing
yourself, wrong set and setting. Those can give
you bad sessions, which are not of the quality
that I'm talking about. Yeah, I will share that
when I was in high school, a group of friends
wanted to do LSD or acid as it was called as well.
And I did not partake. However, I was the sitter
and my role was to make sure that everybody did
have a good experience, which actually
the few times that that happened was
always the case. But, I know you mentioned that a
bad trip is not necessarily a bad trip. Yeah.
So you suggest that that's part of the process,
but one needs to be… have done the preparation
ahead of time to know what they're getting into.
Yeah, I mean, psychedelics amplify consciousness
and most people will take us like… I don't want
to overgeneralize… Some people take a psychedelic
and what they're looking for is a good afternoon,
a little more openness to the life of the
universe, a little more openness to the love
that's in the universe. And they maintain the
fundamental parameters of their personality,
get softer and expansive and let some of
these experiences in, which is perfectly fine.
But if you want to go into a deep dive, if you
want to explore the deep structure of existence,
if you want to transcend space, transcend
time, move into the deep future,
that requires a more carefully
laid out strategy in working
with these states. So I'm not suggesting
that the way I work with these states is the only
way, beneficial way to work with these states is
simply for me as a philosopher, I was looking for
depth of immersion, depth of understanding
that takes some serious work. So while
we're on the topic of this death and rebirth,
surrendering, purification, can you share with
us what is it that dies and reborn? I know you
outline in your book a few different areas that
you've come to understand. Yeah, well basically
this became a real intellectual issue for me. I
mean, when you experience dying and being reborn
through multiple levels of reality,
it then becomes a question, what
is it that's actually dying?
You may have deep and profound experiences of
dying years after you've gone through ego death,
and it's not simply the ego dying over and over
and over again. It's a different kind of death.
So at the appendix in LSD and the Mind of the
Universe, I have an appendix on what dies and
is reborn, and I suggest four levels of maybe
beginning to address that question. One of them
is what dies is our personal ego. Second is
what dies is some aspect of the collective ego,
of the collective psyche. Third, what dies is what
I call the shamanic persona, complicated concept,
but when you've been on the journey for a long
time, when you move into psychedelic space,
you resume your psychedelic persona, you
resume your shamanic persona. It's like,
as a friend of mine said, you
walk with the old ones once again.
You've made the transition often enough that
your shamanic persona is the living integration
of all of your psychedelic experiences up to
that point in time. So let's say, in this case,
20 sessions in, working at the level of the
collective psyche into what I call the ocean
of suffering, you stabilize a psychedelic
identity, a shamanic persona that integrates
all the experiences that you have had of
transpersonal states of consciousness beyond
your physical consciousness. If you are going to
go into yet a still deeper level of consciousness
beyond where you had lived before, then that
shamanic persona has to die. It has to surrender
in order for a new category instead
of a category of experiences to emerge
and for a still deeper shamanic persona to
emerge. And so I think in some advanced sessions,
what is dying is the previous identity
or the identity which we had developed
from sustained psychedelic experiences over
many years. So that's I think the third thing
is I would suggest it's what I call the shamanic
persona or the shamanic self is dying. It's not
the egoic self. It's your psychedelic self,
which is dying. And then at a more subtle level,
I think what is dying is actually some
dimension of consciousness itself. And this
gets harder to discuss because it requires a more
subtle level of understanding. But basically,
sometimes in my late work, when I was working
at very deep levels of consciousness, when I was
working in deep levels of divine communion, I had
the experience that the divine level that I was
experiencing came itself into a crescendo which
opened up a higher level of divine communion
than had been actualized up to this point in
time. Sri Aurobindo says when he's talking in
his metaphysical system, he says, looking down,
the divine sees all the levels of reality that
it's manifested, but it's a one-way mirror.
So the divine looking down sees everything.
But we, who are the divine looking up, tend to
see only the level that we are at. So it's a
one-way mirror. And that means even at deep, deep
levels, so we'd say there are aspects of divine
consciousness which cannot see or experience
into still deeper levels of divine consciousness.
And somehow, when we do this work, we actually can
facilitate a communion which takes place between
two different levels of divine consciousness, far
beyond space-time, far beyond personal reality.
And there is a celebratory joy that takes place
when the divine wakes up to a still deeper level
of the divine. There is a communion that takes
place. There is a joyful celebration when the
higher is able to infuse itself more deeply into
the lower. And so I think that one of the things,
one way of thinking about what dies in very
advanced stages is some aspect of divine
consciousness itself. And yet, according
to your experiences, that death then
precipitates a rebirth, typically. Did you
discover that with consciousness itself as well?
Yes. Or the divine itself? Yeah, I mean,
it's, again, it's complicated because
we're rushing into an area where angels fear to
tread. Right, we're trying to put language to
an experience that many, sometimes, for
example, with near-death experiencers,
they'll say it's ineffable. So I
understand there's a language barrier.
Well, there is a language barrier, but for me,
the biggest issue is not the language barrier.
It is to lay the foundation, to lay the
prerequisites, to put things in place so that
you people can understand the language that
you want to use to describe these phenomena.
And it's not ordinary day language. It's not
everyday experience. It requires kind of a
conceptual reframe, a conceptual understanding,
so that you can describe certain things that
lie far beyond our ordinary, sensate experience.
But in some ways, it's not that different from
what a near-death episode person experiences. In
fact, I find, I feel the greatest correspondence
and collegiality with people who have had
deep near-death episode experiences because
deep NDEs are the experiences of the closest
correlate to my experience with deep psychedelic
work. I think if you work with psychedelics
in a focused way over long periods of time,
you can access the same dimensions of
consciousness that someone accesses with an NDE,
a near-death experience. The difference is that
where for most people, the NDE-er experiences
this only once in their life. With sustained
psychedelics, you can go back multiple times
into this territory. And because you can go back
multiple times, you're taught there are more
nuances that are brought out in terms of how
this all works in the interplay of consciousness.
Can you help expand the conceptual framework
for us a little bit about what that experience
has been like for you? Let me narrow it into
one particular, just to take one example.
When I was into the work now, I guess, four or
five years into the work, and I began to get
systematic access to archetypal reality, and I
began to have experiences. Every time I went into
my session, I entered a level of reality that I
knew was more real than space-time. It was the
primary reality. Space-time was the secondary
reality. I had encounters with vast beings that
I could not comprehend. I could not wrap my mind
around them. But I knew that these were the beings
who were responsible for creating space-time and
creating fundamental conditions within space-time.
But to have access to these realities,
everything that I had known about human history,
about human thought, everything about the history
of humanity had to fall away because the entire
collective psyche had to fall away in order
to enter into levels of consciousness that
humanity as a whole has not had access to or
has not experienced. Very few number of people
have access to these deep dimensions of
reality. But even in archetypal reality,
you're dealing with very profound levels of
consciousness, but there is still dualism there.
There is still a sense of self and other,
archetype and self, different archetypes.
There is a dualistic quality to it. When I went
beyond archetypal reality into causal reality,
that's the signature of causal reality that all
dualisms dissolve so that you begin to experience
the world in whatever aspect you're experiencing
it. You're experiencing the world as a unified,
single entity, a single consciousness.
I think it was Plotinus who says,
the world breathes as one. And that's the
experience there, that there is a radical
transparency that opens where you are
fundamentally encountering the wholeness of life
that doesn't negate differentiation. In fact, it
affirms differentiation, but that differentiation
is experienced as different manifestations
of this single, integrated, whole, undivided
reality that we call God or we call the divine
or the one. That's a different category of
experience altogether from archetypal reality.
Can you share a little bit more about why it's
termed archetypal reality or that layer for
those who maybe aren't familiar with archetypes?
I use the term archetype in two senses here.
One is Jung talked about archetypes as the
primary themes, the repetitive themes of human
experience that become concretized in forms,
old man, old woman, trickster,
jokester, those clacks of shadow.
And then, so I think of them as kind of
archetypal in the sense of the primary,
the dominant themes of the
collective psyche. I see.
The second way in which archetypes
is used is in the Platonic tradition,
where Plato talks about the discovery of a level
of reality that lies beyond time-space altogether.
And I experience both. I experience Plato's
sense of archetypes. I experience that reality,
but not in the way that Plato describes it. Plato
thinks of archetypes as eternal principles within
an eternal being. So they are the unchanging
prototypes that are used in creation, and they
exist within the mind of an unchanging divine,
unchanging infinite being. That's not how I
experience those archetypes. I experience them
as living entities, but living on a vast scale
of time and space, far beyond anything that we
know inside time and space. But what is shared
is that for something to manifest inside time
and space, it comes out of the oneness through
these fundamental intermediate structures,
which are very profound, super-intelligent,
super-powerful structures, and then focusing
this energy down into concretizing it,
concretizing it, into eventually manifesting
in space-time reality as we know it.
When I experience the collective psyche, and
I experience a lower level of archetypes,
in Jung's sense of archetypes, it was similar to
Jung's sense in that there were these archetypal
themes within humanity, but I did not experience
what Jung experienced as archetypes. I didn't have
the experience of wise old man, wise old woman,
things like this. It's not that I don't think
those exist. What I experienced was humanity as
a single organism, over and over and over again,
as a single organism, and that there
were metameridians within humanity that
wove all of our individual lives into
the life of the human species as a whole.
So I learned that our minds are woven into the
collective mind. They are aspects. They are seed
crystals within the collective mind. Even our
bodies and the diseases that we have to manage
are all part of the body of humanity
evolving itself over long periods of time.
So it was archetypal in the sense of
trans-individual motifs within the human psyche,
but it wasn't quite the way Jung
conceptualized it. So basically,
archetypes in this way reflect the insight
that there are dominant structures that are
supra-personal. They go beyond the
functioning of individual beings,
and then in platonic sense, there are
metaphysical archetypes that basically inform
manifestation of time and space itself.
So at the causal level, you mentioned this is
where you connect with the divine intelligence,
what we perceive as God. I imagine there
may be people listening wondering,
did you discover that there is a God? I
generally tend not to like to use God language,
though I do. The reason I don't like to use God
language is because as someone who knows the
history of world religions pretty well,
I also know all the theologies that have gone into
God language, and all the cultural limitations
that go into it, and all the abuse that went into
it, and all the crimes and the horrible things
that have been done in the name of God. And
certainly, I'm not talking about God in anything
like that. And so I would use the word the divine
instead of God, but that's really that's just
an end run, because even the concept of the divine
carries into it certain carryovers from our
time-space experience. And so on the one hand,
I want to affirm the idea that there is this
profound generative intelligence
manifesting as time and space,
that time and space is not something
which is independent of the divine,
but it is a classic Hindu thinking, it is
the manifestation of the body of the divine.
So in that way, I want to affirm a
very wide vision of the divine, of God.
But because I've gone so deeply into the future,
and so deeply beyond space and time so many times,
my understanding or my feeling
for this cosmic principle,
I can't fit it inside the theologies of the
religions of the world. It's just it's much
larger than that. And so on the one hand, okay,
I can call it God, but then I have to qualify
that it's not this, it's not that, it's not what
you mean by God here, it's not what you mean by
God there. Right, like a lot of people think of,
at least in the monotheistic traditions, think of
individual or a being that were made in the form
of, right? And that's what I think people are
maybe curious about is what you discovered as
far as, you know, did you connect with a being or
beings or angels or other divine entities? And if
you could share a little bit about what that realm
was like. In all the years when I was doing this
work and all the work I did, I never encountered
a being, a divine beings that I'm God, you know,
this is what I am. It wasn't like that. It was
like, I would go deeper into a level of
consciousness and I would experience a communion
with this consciousness. And this consciousness
would teach me, it knew me, it would teach me
and show me things and it would crush me and
then bring me forward into still deeper levels.
And I would go into those deeper levels and I
would enter into communion with those levels and
I internalized the energy of those
levels and I was with this consciousness.
But it never crystallized into a specific form. I
always felt its presence. It guided my sessions.
I could enter into dialogue with it. I
could enter into communion with it. It
would dissolve me into
itself. But it never
crystallized into what you might call a
personality of God or a person of God.
And it just kept getting larger and larger,
deeper and deeper, more and more vast.
And I think that many of our theologies of God
or our thinking about God is really based upon
what I would call the early
encounters with an infinite
intelligence. That this infinite intelligence
is far larger, far too large to ever be
concretized in the historical
lineages that we recognize in
the world traditions. It's infinite in itself.
In fact, when I was in the deepest level of
consciousness that I ever went into when I was in
the diamond luminosity work, and that's the work
that occupied me for the last five years, when I
was as deep into the diamond luminosity as I had
ever entered and I was far beyond time-space
reality, I was dissolved into the luminous,
you might say the body of the divine, all of
a sudden my visual field turned 90 degrees,
a window opened up, and I saw reality far, far in
the distance. And I saw a light in that reality,
and a beam of light came out of that reality
and hit me. And I was in the diamond luminosity
condition. But this light was so powerful,
it shattered my mind. And it took me minutes
to recover from this. And that's when I began to
realize it's an infinite progression. The divine
is truly an infinite reality. Even using this
powerful method, I would never get to the end
of this reality. And that's one of the reasons
why I would be much gentler with myself if I were
doing this again today. Because I discovered,
see, when I began this work, I thought that the
purpose was to reach a state of consciousness, to
reach enlightenment, or to reach oneness with God,
or to dissolve into the primal void. And I had
known oneness with God at many different levels,
and I had entered into the primal void several
times, and I'd learned that there were different
depths of the primal void. And so now I began to
understand that it's not about getting to some
end state, which is going to magically transform
your life. It's a matter of opening up and letting
the love and intelligence of the universe or the
divine into you as much as you can bring it in,
as much as you can hold on to it, as much as
you can distill into the fabric of your living
existence, your earthly existence. It's not about
getting to some end point. It's about deepening
the ongoing communion that exists between
ourselves inside time and space and this larger
spiritual reality. Very beautiful. Can you
share more with us about the diamond luminosity?
Light surfaces many times in our psychedelic
work. I mean, every time you go through a death
rebirth experience, very
typically people encounter
the light, many forms of light. And I had
encountered this light at many different levels
along the journey. After I'd gone through ego
death, after I'd gone through the ocean of
suffering work, after I'd gone through archetypal
reality, after I'd gone into the causal level
reality, about 15 years into my work, when I had
been given so many spiritual treasures, I felt
completely existentially satisfied. I mean, I just
I had been to experience radical Śūnyatā,
emptiness of self, oneness of all existence
had been offered so many treasures. And then
I went through yet another
cycle of death and rebirth.
And I accessed a level of light, a dimension
of light, that was so pure and so clear,
it absolutely stunned me. And it became my sole
objective in the rest of my psychedelic work
to return to this reality. Because once you
touch what I'm calling the diamond luminosity,
once you touch it, it's a reality which is so
far beyond anything that I had ever touched in
any of my earlier work, that I just lost interest
in archetypal reality, I lost interest in causal
reality, I wanted to get back into this level of
reality. It's so pure, it's just breathtakingly
magnificently pure, and the levels of ecstasy
associated with it are just staggering. And in
the next five years of work, in 26 sessions,
which is one third of my entire journey, I only
got access to this level of reality four times.
So in between those four sessions were lots of
purification, more purification at a very
deep level, more learning, more teaching,
but accessing this reality four times. And
I think as I look at the world's literature,
the spiritual literature, and Buddhist literature
is probably the tradition that I know the best,
they call this level of reality Dharmakāya,
the clear light of absolute
reality. So it is considered
in their tradition, the absolute foundational
reality of time and space, all time and space
reality, all the galaxies, all the big bang emerge
out of this crystalline light, which is a pre
samsaric, it's what we would
call an extra samsaric reality.
It's outside of the cycle of space and
time. So it's outside of physical reality,
and it's also outside of the bardos of postmortem
existence. It's outside of the entire system. Once
you touch it, you're hopelessly in love with it
for the rest of your life. It just is something
that illumines everything. I understood what
Buddhist meant when they said, touch it once,
it can undo hundreds of years of living in the
shadows of karma. Because it has
such a penetrating transformative
effect, impact, that just to touch
it, it changes your whole understanding of
existence, and your whole experience of what
it means to be alive. Is this also what
you refer to in your book as the beloved?
Well, you know, everybody has to find a word to
describe this transcendent reality. We can talk
about God, or we can talk about the divine. Some
people call it the absolute. Daoism calls it the
eternal Dao. Jewish mysticism calls it the Ein
Sof, the great nothingness, the great emptiness.
I call it my beloved, because in a path of
temporary immersion, you move into intimacy
with this reality, and then you come back out of
it. And then you move into intimacy, and you come
back out of it, and it becomes like a love
relationship. But it's a love relationship
which actually dissolves the bodies of the two
different beings. The communion that arises is
it's a deep and profound spiritual communion. And
so I just adopted the vocabulary that felt most
natural to me, and I called it my beloved, the
beloved. And so yes, to me, the beloved manifests
itself at all sorts of different levels.
It's manifesting itself at the early level,
early stages,
the middle stages,
and the advanced stages. But in the end,
you recognize that you're always in dialogue
with this profound creative intelligence, which
interestingly enough feels more like a she,
in my experience, than a he. And I associate the
feminine side of God with the act of creation.
And what you might think of as the masculine side
of God, as the radically transcendent aspect of
the basic idea is that the primal one divides
into two. One stays outside of space-time,
the other manifests space and time, and
manifests all life within space and time.
So for me, the beloved is more the feminine
side of the divine, the divine mother.
Yes, it seems that light is a theme in your
experiences. And also, how much of a role
did or does love play in
these experiences for you?
It played, eventually, a very large
role. There were some sessions in which I
encountered or was blessed with experiences of
cosmic love. And it's love not like anything I'd
ever experienced before. It just absolutely
shatters me and overwhelmed me. I experienced
that all of existence was generated not out of
simply a sheer power. Can you think of the power
of the Big Bang and everything that emerged
from it? Not only the intelligence there,
but that love, a profound cosmic love,
why is it the very act of creation itself?
And that's obviously a kind of love that's not
like anything that we know in human parlance.
It's not anything nearly that small. But it
is the fiber of the divine itself. And I think
as love and oneness are kind of two
different sides of the reality. Because
love, if the world is truly one, if it's all one,
love is the emotion of this oneness. Love is the
fact of oneness asserting itself in a world of
duality. Yeah, love has been really important,
which really surprised me because of the four
yogas in Hinduism, Jñāna, the path of the mind,
Rāja, the path of meditation, Karma yoga, Bhakti
yoga, Bhakti yoga, the yoga of loving devotion.
It's a form of yoga that I identified with the
least. I've always been more intellectually
oriented, meditatively oriented, not Bhakti
oriented. And yet I began to have a series of
very profound Bhakti experiences that it's kind
of what led me to talk about the beloved in this
very lover kind of context. How much
is love the fabric of the divine?
Anything I say at this point, I mean, first
of all, please forgive my hubris at daring to
describe the nature of the divine. I mean,
come on, get real. I mean, this is just like...
So anything I say is going to be totally
inadequate to the reality itself. So we
describe the divine nature as infinite
knowledge, infinite power, infinite love.
All of those are equally true, and I'm
sure that there are other qualities
which we want to add to that.
But let's start with those three.
The challenge, I think, of understanding
the love aspect of the divine is because life as
we experience it is an often dirty, nasty, mean,
cruel thing. And so any suggestion that somehow
the world as we know it with all of its
pain and suffering is somehow a manifestation of a
supremely loving consciousness, it's horrendously
difficult to reconcile those. And I understand
that. I mean, as a philosopher of religion,
I understand the challenge. And I think the only
way of overcoming that challenge is to really
understand the deep structure or the deep
intentionality that's manifesting itself
in the creation itself, in our evolving
universe, in the project of the universe.
You have to radically expand your time horizon to
understand what's taking place here. You have to
understand that the human condition as we
currently know it is just a small dot in a long
developmental process that not only has been
going on for 13.7 billion years, but will continue
to go on for 13.7 plus more years. So that, as
Sri Aurobindo said, we are a transitional species.
We are actualizing ourselves within a long
developmental trajectory. And if we think that,
well, God must not be real because we could
have done a better job creating the universe.
If I had infinite power, I could have certainly
created a better universe than this where children
die and all the terrible things that happen to
us. But that assumes that we know what the divine
intention is, what the project of existence is.
And I think we are like children in a playpen.
We are just beginning to get a grip on the
enormity of the project of existence. We're
just beginning, really since Hubble, in modern
theories of cosmology, beginning to understand
the size and depth and textures. I think
psychedelics are kind of like the Hubble
of psychological insight. They are giving us an
experience of the depth in which consciousness
exists. But that just gets us at the beginning
of beginning to comprehend what is the project.
What will humanity be five billion years from
now? What will we be a million years from now,
or even a hundred thousand years from now?
The divine seems to think on that scale.
So we have to radically stretch
ourselves to think on that scale.
So the problem of suffering really challenges
our understanding of the role of love,
the principle of love in the divine nature. But
once we have an experiential access to some of
the deeper trajectories of the divine
intent, then things begin to make more sense.
I think the divine is creating a masterpiece.
I mean, I think refined, elevated,
potentiated human experience is a masterpiece
of creation that takes thousands, thousands,
millions of years, billions of years
to orchestrate and to bring forward,
especially since it's not done. We intentionally
cooperate and participate in this creative
process. It's not being done to us. It's
something we are carrying forward in the very
fiber of our being. But we really have
to kind of grasp the scale of things
to even understand our present circumstances.
At the same time, it sounds like you found that
the Atman is Brahman, that you found that we are
part of the divine and the divine is part of us.
Yeah. And really, there's very little that's
new in any of the experiences that I lay out.
The vision of reality, the cosmology that emerges
out of psychedelic work is fundamentally the same
as the cosmology that emerges out of deep mystical
spiritual traditions in the very highest and most
refined levels of spiritual traditions in the
world. It's not that we're bringing something
new to the table, maybe a little bit, but we're
not bringing a whole lot of new to the table.
What we have is a different protocol, a different
strategy for accessing these very deep levels of
reality, which yield deep insights into the
structure of existence. But you will find
the same fundamental cosmology emerging out of
the great spiritual traditions of the world.
Since you brought up the
Hubble telescope, and we've
primarily been talking about what we consider
just another word as consciousness, what did you
discover in our universe, what we consider
as sort of the physical universe, what we
consider as space or outer space?
Did you traverse that aspect of
experience in your sessions?
I wasn't taken into journeys
into our galaxy or journeys into other galaxies.
That just wasn't part of the work for me. Other
people may have those experiences or have had
those experiences. So while I was given this
particular session called the cosmic tour,
I called it the cosmic tour, where I was
taken on this cosmic tour
and shown so many things,
much of which I could not reproduce when I
came back into my time-space consciousness,
because my time-space consciousness just did
not have the vocabulary, the intellectual tools
to articulate those. That's why I've often wished
that I had a PhD in physics and astrophysics,
that I would better be able to articulate
some of the experiences that I was given.
But I didn't spend a lot of time traveling
within time and space. It was more a matter of
going underneath time and space and getting into
the underlying deep structure that informs time
and space and our experience in time and space.
I feel like I recall in your book that you were
shown that the universe, I think you've already
said this, goes on and on essentially. Is that
right? Do I recall that correctly? Yeah.
Basically, there are two different models
of the universe. One is that it'll keep expanding
forever. And the other is that we reach a point
where there's a maximum expansion, and then
it begins a contraction. So is it a pulsating
universe, expanding and contracting, and then
re-expanding? Or is it an infinitely expanding
universe? I don't really have an
answer to that particular question,
but clearly the universe is
just, it's on a tear. It's on
a tear. It's going on for billions
and billions and billions of years.
Now, that's a deflating insight if you think that
a human being is simply a 100-year-old being.
If we're simply a 100-year-old being, then we're
basically sand on the beach beside the ocean. We
don't really get to participate in that deep
future. But if reincarnation is true, and I think
there's plenty of factual evidence that it's true,
if reincarnation is true, and if it's true that
our essence is indestructible, and that we take
everything that we've learned and roll it over
to continue learning over thousands and thousands
and millions of years, then we get to actually
participate in this divine unfolding. It's not
somebody else's future or some other future,
but it's our future. We are co-participants,
eternal participants in this eternal process.
Mm-hmm. In your experiences, you talked
about the birth of the future human.
Yeah. Can you shed a little
light on what that is about?
Yeah. Yeah, there's a chapter in the book
called The Birth of the Future Human,
and I really think this is maybe the
most important chapter of the book,
and it's also the one that
caught me completely by surprise.
I wasn't expecting anything like this in my
journey. I thought first it was a personal
journey about personal healing,
personal awakening. Then when
that expanded, I still thought, okay,
it's a journey about an individual being given
experiences that provide insight into the deep
structure underlying our lives. But then about
halfway through my work, starting in around 1990
and continuing through 1995, I began to be given a
series of visions that were internally consistent,
that were dropped into my sessions talking
about humanity's evolutionary destiny,
where humanity was in its evolutionary
journey, that we were coming into a
turning point in history, that we were
coming into a culmination, a crescendo of the
evolutionary journey that was going to catalyze
a transformation inside humanity that would
mark a true before and after moment in time.
There was a profound spiritual transformation
that was coming to a crescendo, coming to a head,
and this kept repeating itself
in my work in different ways.
But I did not know how the universe was ever
going to pull this off. It didn't show me how
it was going to happen. Then about a year and
a half later, when I was in the middle of the
diamond luminosity work, so I was working
at a very deep level, in one particular day,
I was given an experience taken far into
the future. I had died and dissolved into
the human psyche. So when I say I was taken
into the future, it's not so much that Chris
Bache was taken into the future. It's like, as
the human family, I experienced the human family
in a trans-temporal dimension of
time, in a time-expanded state,
and I experienced in an accelerated way the
death and rebirth of the entire human family.
I experienced a profound geopolitical crisis that
seemed to be being seeded by a cascading series of
ecological crises, but I experienced some type
of fundamental loss of control, an unraveling of
life at the basic level, a tremendous global
crisis that was so deep and so profound that no
one was going to be able to isolate
themselves or protect themselves from
it. It was a crisis so deep
it was going to bring
humanity to our collective knees.
But just when the crisis reached its peak,
I experienced that we moved through it, and then
there was the beginning of a lightning. We made it
through this crisis, and when we began to pick
ourselves up in this post-crisis period of
history, we've discovered
that we had been profoundly
changed. Something happened in this crisis that
opened us up, changed us at the very center of
our being. One way of talking about it is that
there was a birth of oneness, that oneness,
instead of being a private mystical experience
of a very select few, oneness was born within the
human psyche as a whole. We tapped into a certain
depth of our nature that allowed us to become,
first of all, it allowed us to become no
longer enemies with all of the human beings,
all the divisions of history that have been used
to justify differences of race, differences of
class structure, differences of religion, all
those differences which we think of and have used
to divide history, national identity, all those
were dissolved, all those were transcended,
and we began to experience a fundamental
oneness at the core of our life and all life
itself. This led to creativity began to reinforce
itself, and we began to create new social forms,
new structures. Eventually, over time, I
came to understand that what this was about
was that there was a pressure building
up within the collective psyche,
and that this pressure was taking humanity
through a collective death-rebirth process
that represented a fundamental irreversible shift
in the collective psyche. I think of it as a shift
in the plate tectonics of the collective psyche so
that any child born after we make this transition
will be operating within a psychic field which
is fundamentally different, more elevated,
more spiritually informed
than we are operating out
of now or we've been operating out of the past.
This isn't simply a crisis with economic
ramifications or industrial ramifications
or political or civic ramifications. It's
a revolution in the fundamental structure
of the human psyche. It's a revolution in our
human nature. Now, I think that we have entered
this period, this process. I think we're in
the very early stages of it. We're just getting
started on it. I think the
21st century will be pivotal
in going through this transformative crisis.
I wasn't given a lot of details on names, dates,
and places and stuff like that. What I was given
was this core experience of what it's going
to feel like for the human
family when they go through
a collective dark night of the soul, go through
a collective ordeal that eventually will awaken
an underlying revolution in the human psyche,
a spiritual opening of the human psyche.
Now, I'm not alone. This is nothing unique to me.
This is an insight that many spiritual teachers
have had, many indigenous people
have had. Many psychedelicists
have tapped into this understanding.
I think this is the flow of history underneath
us that we can tap into in different ways. I think
many of the spiritual mystical traditions
have tapped into and begin to
understand some of this dynamic,
but I think we're coming into a century
where we are at a critical turning point.
I really believe that the 21st century is
pivotal here because if we just look at the
scientific data on the ecological crisis,
if we look at what is now an increasingly
shared understanding of the depth of
ecological disruption that we're going into
and the change of interrupting. Well, I won't
go into the scientific material but clearly
we cannot continue on earth operating the
way that we had been operating in the past.
We don't have enough resources. Inequality is
just too extreme. I don't think we can continue
to govern the earth out of the psychological
structure of the ego. The ego is fundamentally
a divided psychic structure. I think the ego
is a beautiful thing. It's a magnificent thing
but it fundamentally is cut off from the core of
existence, the foundation of existence and each
other. We need to evolve into a higher level of
consciousness which is post-egoic in order to
have the wisdom to rise to the challenges that
the ego has created for humanity over its last
1000 year history. And I think we will. I think
we will come through this crisis. I think we're
going to go through unbelievable suffering in
the centuries ahead but I do believe that we come
through it because that at least has been the
nature of my experience. We do come through this
and humanity does make this evolutionary pivot.
Well, I know there's more you can share about
this topic and I think we'll do a whole other
conversation about the birth of a future human
and also we want to talk more about reincarnation.
Can you share why you stopped these LSD sessions
in 1999? Well, I talk about this in the book
in the last chapter coming off the mountain
and I basically boil it down to two reasons,
pain and heartache. My subtle energy system,
psychedelic states open you up to huge flows of
energy. You're taking in enormous flows of energy.
It takes years and years to manage the flows
of energy and I basically realized that I was
running so hot that even months after my session
was over, I was permanently uncomfortable in my
body because of the quantity of energy that was
running in my subtle energy system, my chi system
or my prana. So that was telling me that it was
time to let my body calm down and let that subtle
energy system find a new equilibrium point. But
the main reason I stopped was because of heartache
because once you dissolve into the divine light,
once you dissolve into diamond luminosity and
dissolve into the crystalline nature of
consciousness at this very, very deep level,
coming back into time and space is just difficult.
It's very hard. You lose your zest for living
inside time and space when you know how much more
is available to you outside of time and space.
And going into and coming out of and going into
and coming out of this just became too painful.
And so eventually my beloved and I came
to an agreement that I would not return
to these states of consciousness
until I could stay with her forever.
And that's really what lies behind
my stopping. I just had to stop
and for the rest of my life focus on internalizing
the gifts that I had already been given
rather than trying to acquire
or be given more gifts.
You've been in communication with Stanislav Grof
and Ralph Metzner who are pioneers in this area
of psychedelics and psychological
consciousness, cosmic exploration.
Have you shared your experiences with them
and what have they shared with you about that?
I've been in dialogue with both of them and I have
shared my sessions with Stan and he quotes from
some of my sessions scattered throughout his
books. Some of them are anonymous and in some
later works they're identified as mine.
And Stan very graciously wrote a beautiful
forward to my book Dark Night Early Dawn which
was my first major book on psychedelic work,
psychedelic theory. I think that there's a
fundamental, I mean we have different projects,
different agendas. I mean Stan is a therapist,
he's a world healer. He has worked with thousands
of individuals and collected thousands and
thousands of session experiences and organized
them into an understanding
of the vast scope of the
landscape that one experiences in these states.
My work has been different. I've really been
doing an individual journey penetrating deeper
and deeper into the universe. So I see
our work as complementary in that way.
But yeah, I've been in dialogue with both
of them. Yeah, I love them both very dearly.
Ralph has now transitioned on. I love them dearly.
We've been in dialogue. Ralph gave me feedback
on LSD and the Mind of the Universe before I
published it. So yeah, I consider them close
colleagues and good friends. So they were
supportive of your process? Yes, yeah.
That's wonderful. The last area I want to touch
on with you is that of course people listening,
some may think, well how much can we trust
these experiences? And I know that you had a
conversation or an interaction with Kenneth
Ring who is the co-founder of the International
Association for Near Death Studies. I was
wondering if you could share a little bit about
your correspondence with him or what you have to
say about how much we can trust your experiences?
Yeah, that's a really important question. I
mean, how do we know that we aren't simply
exploring some hidden corner of my
personal unconscious or even some
hidden corner of the collective psyche, I
mean, I know I understand how radical the
assertions that I'm making, making them sound
almost cavalier. How do we know that we can trust
these experiences to be what I'm suggesting that
they are? And Ken Ring and I had a dialogue about
this. Ken is a wonderful scholar and he's a good
friend. And so after he had read LSD and the Mind
of the Universe, he wrote me and we went back and
forth around precisely this issue. How trustable
are these deep psychedelic experiences? How
do we know that they're not better understood
as a manifestation of something coming out of
the personal psyche or the collective psyche,
that they really have these metaphysical
ontological ramifications that I've been
interpreting them to have? And so he and I went
back and forth in an exchange of letters about
this. And Ken worked me over pretty hard. I mean,
he was asking hard questions and I loved it. And
this was a dialogue that was
worth sharing. So we wrote
it up in an essay called Are Deep Psychedelic
Experiences Trustable? And we published it online
and it's available. If you just Google that title,
you'll find it. And in it, I try to address
that specific issue. And I also bring in
other people's experiences which provide
levels of objective verification, because
many psychedelic experiences lead us
to have experiences that can be verified
because they relate to something inside time
and space. The deeper cosmological experiences
cannot be verified in that way, but the existence
of verifiable experiences when they refer to time
and space reality certainly points to the
credibility of the deeper
cosmological experiences.
So I bring in a lot of evidence in the footnotes
and in the literature that speak to the issue
of the trustability of these experiences. I
think most of our doubt about their trustability
is completely understandable, but I think it comes
from, first, not having personal experience of
these states and trying to understand them within
a metaphysical framework that's based upon time
of physical sensation experience, mental
experience, sensate experience. We're trying to
understand these things within a framework
which is smaller than we want they need to be.
It's just like we had to have tens of thousands
of near-death episodes in print and published
before the medical community began to take them
seriously because they didn't want to interpret
these as an indication of the existence of
spiritual reality. They wanted to interpret it
as something going on inside
the physical process. And I
think that's true for psychedelic experiences
too. We need to develop a more sophisticated
ontology, metaphysical understanding,
even to have a framework for understanding
some of these experiences. And this is why
I didn't rush into print on any of these
experiences. I mean, after I stopped my work in
99, I really spent 20 years digesting them,
analyzing, looking at other people's experiences,
looking at the other metaphysical systems, and
trying to put all the pieces of the jigsaw puzzle
together before I published LSD in the Mind of the
Universe. So a lot of thought, it's not simply,
here's my experience, you can trust it because I
had it. It's not that at all. What we really want
is not just one person's experiences, but we want
to have a critical protocol which involves
many people's experiences, putting all of our
experiences on the table and finding out which
of these experiences are idiosyncratic
and which one of them are common ground.
We haven't really begun that work yet. We're in
the early stages of doing that. But psychedelics
are not going to go away. We're going to be using
them for decades and hundreds of years to come.
And this challenge of collective verification
of the visions that emerge in these states
is just getting started, is just moving forward.
It sounds like you're suggesting that
we need more research in this area,
which can be tricky because of the taboo and
the legalities around it. Although it seems that
with other studies on psilocybin and other
psychedelics that maybe that's beginning to
shift. I think it is beginning to shift. I think
what's happening is the psychedelic community
is demonstrating with increasing convincing
research that these substances have a tremendous
power to heal. And that's what's bringing them
back into public discussion. We're going to find
over time that the same amplifying qualities
which allow them to have a therapeutic impact
continue. If we continue to apply these
methodologies, they continue to open up
deeper and deeper levels of consciousness. And
when we get deep enough, eventually we'll begin
to harvest the philosophical and cosmological
significance of these substances. I gave a talk
at the Erotas Conference at Oxford last fall,
and I called it Seizing the Philosophical and
Cosmological Significance of Psychedelics. We're
not there yet, but I think we're going there.
We will get there to move in this direction.
Well, Chris, I know this is a very large topic,
and I just want to ask this last question,
and I'm excited we're going to have another
conversation. Is there anything you want to share
more today about psychedelics and the cosmic mind?
I want to return again to the cautionary
words that we shared in the very beginning.
This is deep, challenging, demanding work. You
do not try to climb Mount Everest unless you have
all the best equipment and all the best guides
going with you. You do not want to go deep into
the psyche unless you have all the best equipment
and the best context for doing this type of work.
So I want to affirm that. I want to affirm
the importance of a rigorous protocol.
If you want to go deep, you have to have a
particularly rigorous protocol, first just
to survive the encounter, but also to take
experiences and distill them into increasingly
clear, clear, articulate experiences that are
not lost. Your mind just doesn't swallow them up.
You can really bring back the core of the
experience. Once you do that, once you've taken
all the cautions, all the precautions, and once
you have spent time doing your due diligence in
this, then I think we are at the cusp of
a completely new chapter in philosophy of
consciousness, a new chapter in our understanding
what is happening in existence. Why is human
existence the way it is? Why is existence the way
it is? What's going on underneath the surface?
What is the nature of the intelligence
that's manifesting the body of the
universe? What is the nature of the
intelligence manifesting inside
our own hearts and mind over time?
This, I think, is the beginning
of a whole new chapter of philosophical and
spiritual reflection. In conclusion, I just
want to leave with your viewers a sense of
excitement or this tremendous turning point
that we are at, this pivot point of this profound
deepening of our understanding of our experience
of these deep structures of reality and a
deepening of our understanding of what's taking
place behind the scenes and the opportunity
to enter into conscious communion with the
of our existence, which was previously maybe
just the privileged domain of very, very advanced
meditative and contemplative mystics, but now
we have a new modality that allows even ordinary
human beings to have just a touch taste of
these experiences, which can be life-changing.
And for people to know the risks and the benefits,
right? Because each person might have a different
reaction or response to these kinds of
substances. Yeah, there are screening criteria
and more important, more criteria that
would be… which are used in order to
make sure people who do this
work are safe and only people who
should do this work do do this work.
Chris, thank you so much for being with me today.
Thank you so much for going beyond the beyond and
bringing it back for all of us. I really have
enjoyed our conversation and I look forward to
our next one. Thank you, Emmy. I have enjoyed our
conversation too. Thank you for the work you're
doing. We need all the wisdom we can get in the
years ahead. Yes. And for those of you watching
or listening, thank you for being with us because
you are the reason that we are here.
Book three in the new Thinking
Allowed Dialogue series is
UFOs and UAP. Are We Really Alone? Now
available on Amazon. You can now download a free
PDF copy of issue number eight of the New Thinking
Allowed magazine or order a beautiful
printed copy. Go to newthinkingallowed.org